KEP-3136: beta apis off by default (#3137)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-architecture/3136-beta-apis-off-by-default/README.md

[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

New beta APIs will not be enabled in clusters by default.
Existing beta APIs and new versions of existing beta APIs, will continue to be enabled by default: 
if v1beta.some.group is currently enabled by default and we create v1beta2.some.group, v1beta2.some.group will still be enabled by default.

## Motivation

Beta APIs are not considered stable and reliance upon APIs in this state leads to exposure to bugs,
guaranteed migration pain for users when the APIs move to stable, and the risk that dependencies will
grow around unfinished APIs.
Enabling beta APIs by default, exacerbates these problems by making them on in nearly every cluster.
We observed these problems as we removed long-standing beta APIs and the PRR survey tells us that over
90% of production clusters leave these APIs enabled.
Unsuitability for production use is documented at https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/#api-versioning 
("The software is not recommended for production uses"), but defaulting on means they are present in nearly every 

> production cluster.

Reviewer: totally agree

Reviewer 2: If we don't want users to enable them by default, should we instead demand all newly added APIs to be Alpha?

Reviewer 3: not sure if that helps @tengqm

Reviewer 3: we do start things as alpha. and we also saying that beta means "not for production"...

### Non-Goals

1. Change featuregate defaults.

## Proposal

New beta APIs will be placed into the `DisableVersions` stanza instead of the `EnableVersions` stanza (see [DefaultAPIResourceConfigSource](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/0669da445fa8c1ae07c15c0827f0e83da11cbe58/pkg/controlplane/instance.go#L643)).
The `--runtime-config` flag will be extended to allow `group/version/resource=true`, to enable specific resources.
To enable a beta API, a cluster-admin will have to add the appropriate `--runtime-config` flags.

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1

As a cluster-admin I want to enable the coolnewjobtype.v1beta1.batch.k8s.io API in my cluster.

To do this I call `kube-apiserver --runtime-config=batch.k8s.io/v1beta1/coolnewjobtype`.

#### Story 2

As a cluster-admin I want to enable all beta APIs as in past releases.

To do this I call `kube-apiserver --runtime-config=api/beta=true`.
This already exists and will continue to function.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

### Risks and Mitigations

Adoption of beta features will slow.

> Given how kubernetes is now treated, this is a good thing, not a bad thing.

Reviewer 4: Can you add a risk that if two (or more) APIs are tightly coupled, it would be possible to turn them on independently and thus have partially functional cluster?

As you mentioned, for Beta APIs it sounds fine, though it's worth mentioning here.

Reviewer 3: we can probably deal with this as release notes / documentation etc. but yes, it could get problematic

Those users that want to move quickly and get new features can do so by enabling all beta feature
or just enabling those that are important for their workload.

> The [PRR survey](https://datastudio.google.com/reporting/2e9c7439-202b-48a9-8c57-4459e0d69c8d/page/Cv5HB) shows that 

Reviewer: this link request access , 

> over 30% of production clusters have alpha features enabled

that is not a justification per se without explaining how the request access, I have experience from other projects using these kind of surveys to justify decisions, and most of the data was faked or invalid

Author: > this link request access ,

Access added.

The data doesn't appear to support your hypothesis given that cluster-admins in every range from 0-10, 10-100, 101-1000, 1001-10000, more than 10k all have about a 30% rate of enabling alpha features.  I think the phrasing  here as a conclusion  is appropriate.

Reviewer: > The data doesn't appear to support your hypothesis given that cluster-admins in every range from 0-10, 10-100, 101-1000, 1001-10000, more than 10k all have about a 30% rate of enabling alpha features. I think the phrasing here as a conclusion is appropriate.

I was trying to provide an example on why a survey alone is not valid to obtain conclusions and I failed because as you demonstrate my example was just against the survey.

> over 30% of production clusters have alpha features enabled, so cluster-admins are willing and able to enable features

how many clusters were surveyed ? how many cluster do we estimate can be running in the world?
is this a 1% of the total population of clusters or a 90%? ...

that is a correlation based on the survey data, but correlation doesn't mean causality :smile: 

I think that the correct wording is "based on the data from the survey we have some indicators that cluster-admins are willing and able to enable features that are not on by default when they are desired." 

But at this point I feel I'm bike-shedding, is just that I don't like using surveys to justify decisions without strong correlation, feel free to discard the comment

Reviewer 5: I can't believe 30% of clusters have some alpha features enabled, how many clusters total are represented in the survey? I suspect substantial sampling bias.

Reviewer 5: Also note that "30% of clusters have at least one alpha feature enabled" even if true, is NOT equivalent to the thing we really care about, which is "a new pre-GA feature will (with high probability) get exercised prior to GA". (Since the clusters could all be using the same alpha feature.)

Reviewer 5: (That said, the actual point in the text is just that it demonstrably actually happens, so the text is not wrong. That's just a very low bar.)

Author: The core claim is "cluster-admins are willing and able to enable features".

It doesn't sound like there is a dispute on that point. I've updated the text to try to make the claim more clear.

Reviewer 6: AWS EKS doesn't enable cluster admins to change feature gates at the moment (https://github.com/aws/containers-roadmap/issues/512).

Reviewer 7: It's not "30% of clusters have alpha features enabled". It's "30% of cluster admins have enabled an alpha feature in production". Very different claims. But still supporting what we need.

> over 30% of production clusters have alpha features enabled, so clsuter-admins are willing and able to enable features

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
over 30% of production clusters have alpha features enabled, so cluster-admins are willing and able to enable features
```

that are not on by default when they are desired.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

### Test Plan

Integration tests will be written to ensure that no new beta APIs are enabled in the kube-apiserver by default.
Unit tests will be written to ensure that the new flag functionality works as expected.

### Graduation Criteria

This KEP is a policy KEP, not a feature KEP.  It will start as GA.

#### GA

> - Integration and unit tests from above.

Reviewer 8: This probably deserves extra communication such as a blog post, mailing list email, etc

Reviewer 9: +1 to dev@kubernetes.io email early, and blog post explaining change in time for 1.24 release

Reviewer 3: 💯

Author: > This probably deserves extra communication such as a blog post, mailing list email, etc

added to criteria.

The additional command line flag format for `--runtime-config` will not be recognized on older levels of kubernetes.
This means that when downgrading, cluster-admins will have to adjust their CLI arguments if they opted into a new beta API.
This is congruent to flag handling for new features today.
Because this only impacts new beta APIs, there is no behavior change for existing APIs on upgrade.

### Version Skew Strategy

Because this only impacts new beta APIs, there is no novel skew risk.

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

Not applicable because this is a policy KEP.

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?

> -->

Reviewer: We miss a lot of real feedback about possible incompatibilities between APIs, there are cases that just enabling an API causes problems.
We also reduce the signal to CIs and people enabling betas, that is significant

Reviewer 3: +1 @liggitt also agree @aojea. We increase the burden on ourselves for sure.

Author: >  (though that will require CI configuration changes that should be noted in this KEP).

added to criteria.

3. Allow enabling specific resources in beta.  Enable coolnewjobtype.v1beta1.batch.k8s.io without enabling other-neat-job.v1beta1.batch.k8s.io

### Non-Goals

1. Change featuregate defaults.

## Proposal

New beta APIs will be placed into the `DisableVersions` stanza instead of the `EnableVersions` stanza (see [DefaultAPIResourceConfigSource](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/0669da445fa8c1ae07c15c0827f0e83da11cbe58/pkg/controlplane/instance.go#L643)).
The `--runtime-config` flag will be extended to allow `group/version/resource=true`, to enable specific resources.
To enable a beta API, a cluster-admin will have to add the appropriate `--runtime-config` flags.

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1

As a cluster-admin I want to enable the coolnewjobtype.v1beta1.batch.k8s.io API in my cluster.

To do this I call `kube-apiserver --runtime-config=batch.k8s.io/v1beta1/coolnewjobtype`.

#### Story 2

As a cluster-admin I want to enable all beta APIs as in past releases.

To do this I call `kube-apiserver --runtime-config=api/beta=true`.
This already exists and will continue to function.

> 

Reviewer 5: Another risk: since this greatly diminishes the impact of making something beta, we very well may end up with much worse betas. Beta is the new alpha, GA 1.0 is the new beta, GA 2.0 is the new GA 1.0. Only difference is that the new alpha is a lot more work / overhead than the old alpha.

Author: I've tried to address what I think this is getting at in another risk.  I think we have to trust sigs to continue treating their beta APIs as, "nearly there".

Reviewer 4: I think that we should distinguish two things:
- quality of the API itself
- quality of the implementation of the features backing this API

Regarding the first one, I believe in our API approval process and I'm not that worried about this.

Regarding the second one - PRR is supposed to protect us from Beta becoming a new Alpha. Of course this only covers some aspects, there is also a question about usefulness/completeness of the features, but I'm actually challenging some things in these are during PRR reviews too (and I've seen other PRR approvers doing that too), so I'm not that worried about this.

So in other words - I don't think the risk of degrading Beta quality is very high.
I think the risk is that the quality of GA will degrade (which I see you mentioned explicitly below).

Thinking more about this, I'm wondering if we don't want to try mitigating it by explicit addition/extensions to our PRR and/or KEP template itself, that will be more about "user feedback". In other words, we keep a road to beta as is, but in order to reach GA, you no longer need to just say "no complaints from users" (which is a common practice now), but we add an explicit section/questions/whatever that is focused on user feedback that we got in Beta [to mitigate the risk that we won't reach Beta with no/very weak feedback.]
@johnbelamaric @deads2k @ehashman - thoughts from PRR side?

Reviewer 7: I'm not flat out opposed to that idea, wojtek. But it seems like a little bit of scope creep for PRR, which was intended more to review from an observability / supportability / scalability / operational safety point of view. The functional completeness point of view is somewhat different. I think it's fine to push back on obvious gaps but making it a formal part of the process I am not sure about. I would hope that the SIG leadership would be taking the functional completeness aspect into account, before proposing an enhancement for graduation.

What sort of criteria would you want to see in such a KEP question? Specific comments / requests and what was done about them? Number of confirmed users? Instances of use at scale? Some sort of survey? Mailing list discussions?

Reviewer 4: @johnbelamaric - sorry, I think I wasn't clear enough with I was proposing.
So let me rephrase what I was thinking about (that's more of brainstorm than a real proposal now):

1) I'm definitely not proposing adding anything about feature completeness to PRR - that's not the place for it. Maybe in KEP template, but even that seems far from obvious to me. I agree, it's more on SIG leadership to ensure the feature we're pushing makes sense.

2) What I was suggesting was to ensure that a feature that is going to GA was actually validated in some production (or production-ish) environment really. To me this is something we need to validate quality, which PRR to me is also about. With beta APIs being off by-default, in theory it can happen that you will be able to get to GA without any real usage, even if it was sitting in beta for 3 releases (it isn't the case now). So adding some question about "was this validated for real production usacases", sounds like a valid addition to me.
I don't have a specific question on my mind - I don't want to make it too heavy. But maybe requiring something like brief description of production usage validating the usage (e.g. what version, env (e.g. what (cloud-)provider), scale of cluster (not necessary about size of cluster, it can be other dimension to more relevant to this API), and optionally list of found issues will not be that hard and will actually prove that we really did validate that?

Author: added to criteria here: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3137/files#diff-0ad9f743dbfdf3932906414acf0a79e074af723ad2ffb8e0dab3429f0b664beeR261

> ### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

Reviewer 3: How about we talk a bit on folks not only need to check the k8s version, but will have to check if apis are present in addition? 

```installers, utilities, controllers etc that need to know if a certain beta API is present can continue to use the existing discovery mechanisms (example: kubectl's api-resources sub command or the `/api/apps/v1` REST API)```

perhaps?

Author: added to kep.

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 5: There is a missing risk here, which is that of a beta feature getting insufficient exposure and being promoted to GA even though it is half-baked.

Reviewer 3: Agree, we should add this as a risk explicitly in the doc

Author: > There is a missing risk here, which is that of a beta feature getting insufficient exposure and being promoted to GA even though it is half-baked.

adding.

Reviewer 10: The defaults for tools like `minikube` and `kubeadm` could be to enable beta APIs (or perhaps something else, such as enable any beta API that was also beta in the previous release), whilst printing a clear warning about this behavior.

That'd help get exposure for new features, whilst keeping the actual API server behavior in line with this KEP.

Author: > The defaults for tools like minikube and kubeadm could be to enable beta APIs (or perhaps something else, such as enable any beta API that was also beta in the previous release), whilst printing a clear warning about this behavior.

While this could be done, I'd rather not be directive about what those projects should or should not do in this KEP.

> 

Reviewer 5: Another missing risk is that large features become essentially impossible to add incrementally, because the feedback loop is too long. I doubt either SSA or APF would have been able to make progress if this were the rule.

Reviewer 3: good point

Author: > Another missing risk is that large features become essentially impossible to add incrementally, because the feedback loop is too long. I doubt either SSA or APF would have been able to make progress if this were the rule.

APF would definitely have gotten feedback.

SSA did go through some API evolution, though how much was based on "on-by-default" versus, "I want to try this" isn't immediately clear to me.  We had some pretty knowledgeable users providing feedback.

  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

> New beta APIs will not be enabled in clusters by default.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
From the Kubernetes release where this change is introduced, and onwards, beta APIs will not be enabled in clusters by default.
```

Existing beta APIs and new versions of existing beta APIs, will continue to be enabled by default: 
if v1beta.some.group is currently enabled by default and we create v1beta2.some.group, v1beta2.some.group will still be enabled by default.

## Motivation

Beta APIs are not considered stable and reliance upon APIs in this state leads to exposure to bugs,
guaranteed migration pain for users when the APIs move to stable, and the risk that dependencies will
grow around unfinished APIs.
Enabling beta APIs by default, exacerbates these problems by making them on in nearly every cluster.
We observed these problems as we removed long-standing beta APIs and the PRR survey tells us that over
90% of cluster-admins leave production clusters with these APIs enabled.
Unsuitability for production use is documented at https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/#api-versioning 
("The software is not recommended for production uses"), but defaulting on means they are present in nearly every 
production cluster.
By disabling beta APIs by default, a cluster-admin can opt-in for specific APIs without having every
incomplete API present in the cluster.

> 

Reviewer 10: A related bit of context: Kubernetes a few years back relied on some aspects still marked alpha or beta, just to pass (a strict interpretation of) conformance. CRI wasn't GA, CNI was IIRC alpha. CertificateSigningRequest only reached GA in v1.19; now, you don't need CertificateSigningRequest to operate a secure cluster but it really does help.

So, now that you _can_ sensibly run in production with just GA features, we want to help those folks who plan to. I think that's true anyway, and worth mentioning here.

Author: > So, now that you can sensibly run in production with just GA features, we want to help those folks who plan to. I think that's true anyway, and worth mentioning here.

adding.

### Goals

1. Disable new beta APIs by default.
2. Continue enabling existing beta APIs and new version of existing beta APIs by default:
   if v1beta.some.group is currently enabled by default and we create v1beta2.some.group, v1beta2.some.group will still be enabled by default.
3. Allow enabling specific resources in beta.  Enable coolnewjobtype.v1beta1.batch.k8s.io without enabling other-neat-job.v1beta1.batch.k8s.io

### Non-Goals

> 1. Change featuregate defaults.

Reviewer 10: If a KEP requires a new API _and_ a feature gate, does that mean that graduation to beta turns on the feature gate but not the API?

(which might be fine: for example, the controller for the new feature might talk to the API Server, see that the relevant API isn't served, and go to sleep).

Author: > if feature gates are not planned to be included here it would be nice to call it out explicitly in non-goals section
You're commenting on the line in the non-goals that says 
> ### Non-Goals
> 1. Change featuregate defaults.

Is there a way you'd like me to rephrase it to clarify?

Reviewer 10: I recommend adding a clarifying sentence or section about what the behavior for new features might be like. The current wording is sufficient, but relies on the reader having context about what the prior situation looked like in order to model it mentally.

If this KEP is accepted, that explanatory text might eventually have a better home somewhere within https://k8s.dev/ so that contributors are clear on what's expected of their code and designs.

Author: added.

The additional command line flag format for `--runtime-config` will not be recognized on older levels of kubernetes.
This means that when downgrading, cluster-admins will have to adjust their CLI arguments if they opted into a new beta API.
This is congruent to flag handling for new features today.
Because this only impacts new beta APIs, there is no behavior change for existing APIs on upgrade.

### Version Skew Strategy

Because this only impacts new beta APIs, there is no novel skew risk.

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

Not applicable because this is a policy KEP.

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 7: An alternative - or maybe more accurately a follow up - could be something like the "API lenses" idea @thockin proposed a couple years ago here: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1bjyu7ksEM2sNpIyA625zj8XHt_5xtaX_z2EtvA7_fLQ/edit#heading=h.5m3e1uuqb7dd

That proposal is mostly talking about adding/modifying *fields* within an API. However, a similar concept can be applied to whole APIs. For example, this could amount to a "hidden" setting for beta APIs: the API is enabled, but in order to use it, you need to add a special HTTP header. This would avoid the inadvertent "just copy and paste this manifest from the internet" type of spread of APIs. That is, our current method of designated use of a beta API - just slightly different value in a yaml file - is too easy and accessible. The "special header" (or some other mechanism) makes it a more explicit choice (at least until some big provider just sets up all their tooling with that enabled always...).

Reviewer 9: > The "special header" (or some other mechanism) makes it a more explicit choice (at least until some big provider just sets up all their tooling with that enabled always...).

that's exactly what would happen :-/

opt-in things like that are super hard to propagate through pipelines that compose/wrap other tools or manifests, so things designed to handle generic manifests opt into every possible option to work with as many sources as possible.

Reviewer 7: The main point here is that this provides a mechanism that:
1) Avoids inadvertent reliance on beta features
2) Allows enablement of beta features on a cluster while still requiring the end user to consciously "opt in" to the use of that beta feature.

It's somewhat of a middle ground, recognizing that in a shared cluster environment, a specific team may want to rely on a beta feature, but we do not want to expose other users of that cluster to inadvertent risk of creating tech debt.

My proposal would be to implement this KEP - i.e., stop the bleeding/creation of new debt for our users - and then follow up as quickly as possible with something like this that shifts the beta API consumption decision to end users that are well-aware of what they are doing (and only if allowed by the admin, of course).

Reviewer 7: @liggitt, sorry didn't see your comment before I made my second comment. It may be that that would happen. But that would be the providers choice, not the projects choice. That argument also can be used to say "this KEP is useless, people will just explicitly set them to 'on' always".

As I see it, as a project have a couple responsibilities:
1) To our users, we should make it easier to do things the *right* way rather than the wrong way. Today (beta by default), at the current level of scale and maturity, we have this balance wrong. This KEP addresses that.
2) To our feature developers, to ensure we give them the tools they need to build the best features they can, and make it as easy as possible for them to validate that with their users.

I do think the we can do more for 2). I think some proposal like this may be useful in that regard. But that's subject to debate. There are also other ways too help. For example, we can build (via enhancements process or contribex, perhaps), programs to make it easy to recruit and collect feedback from beta testers - a stable set of companies / teams / individuals that have said they are willing to sign up for betas, perhaps. And tooling to provide feedback channels that users can access to review beta features. Even clusters we can stand up, enabled for beta, for them to use (beware the crypto miner hackers :( ). 

For those folks that are worried about a loss in feedback for features - it would be good to start to put together some ideas in this area.

Reviewer 7: yes, good points. however some folks are concerned about the amount of feedback we'll get. rather than have every SIG re-invent the mechanisms, we may be able to help. but I agree it's not clear any help is needed.

Reviewer 11: > I'm assuming that every feature we're building (especially when we're talking about full APIs - because that's what we're talking here), we are not building "in the air".

That's fair, but a lot of the time, probably specifically for API machinery, we create features that will enable people to build "stuff", and they don't know they can build these "stuff" until they try it out. We're building features for way more people than our mere customer base, and we see companies thrive by using our features in creative ways.

Also related to that, a lot of the time, teams can't really rely on a feature until it's enabled on all supported cluster versions. The release process being what it is, that's already a very long time. Turning beta features off will only make that step longer (and more risky). I think this change generally increases the GTM time and risk, two metrics that people are generally trying to decrease.

When moving from beta to GA, it will be important for sigs to explicitly seek feedback.
We will address this by extending the PRR questionnaire to include a GA-targeted question to validate that the feature
was reasonably validated in production use-cases.

If beta APIs are off by default, it is possible that sigs don't treat taking an API as an indication of a "mostly-baked" API.
If this happens, then more transformation may be required.
Keeping our beta API rules consistent and continuing to enforce easy to use APIs seems to be the best option.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

### Test Plan

Integration tests will be written to ensure that no new beta APIs are enabled in the kube-apiserver by default.
Unit tests will be written to ensure that the new flag functionality works as expected.

### Graduation Criteria

This KEP is a policy KEP, not a feature KEP.  It will start as GA.

#### GA

> - Integration and unit tests from above.

Reviewer 4: IIUC, this mostly means "test for per-APi enablement"? Worth making more explicit?

- updating the enablement docs for beta
  - https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/#api-versioning
  - https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#using-a-feature 
    Even though that is talking about feature gates, it is likely worth calling out there that new beta REST APIs are no

>     longer enabled by default)

Reviewer 10: I also recommend revising / expanding the [feature state shortcode](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/hugo-shortcodes/#feature-state) with a parameter to indicate whether or not the feature is enabled by default.
